Point types documentation and FDD calculation (#616)
JuliaPhysics/SolidStateDetectors.jl: docs/src/man/point_types.md

# Point Types

After running `calculate_electric_potential!`, every grid point in `sim.point_types` is assigned a `PointType` value — a `UInt8` bitmask that encodes the physical role of that point in the simulation.

> Point types are used throughout the code to decide which points are updated during the successive over-relaxation (SOR), whether the detector is depleted, which points belong to the inactive layer, and what volume counts as active.

Reviewer: Link the "Simulation Algorithm" section here?

## Bit Flags

Six single-bit flags are defined, each encoding one physical property:

| Bit | Constant | Hex | Meaning |
|-----|----------|-----|---------|
| 0 | `update_bit` | `0x01` | `1` → point is updated in SOR; `0` → fixed point (contacts, exterior boundaries) |
| 1 | `undepleted_bit` | `0x02` | `1` → point is undepleted; `0` → fully depleted |
| 2 | `pn_junction_bit` | `0x04` | `1` → point lies inside the semiconductor volume |
| 3 | `bulk_bit` | `0x08` | `1` → all points in the 3×3×3 neighbourhood (face-, edge-, and corner-adjacent) also have `pn_junction_bit` and `update_bit` set |
| 4 | `inactive_layer_bit` | `0x10` | `1` → point is part of the inactive (dead) layer |

> | 5 | `inactive_contact_bit` | `0x20` | `1` → point is part of the contact adjacent to the inactive layer |

Reviewer: I really like this table! :)
I would argue that we would like to start counting at `1` instead of `0`, in the spirit of Julia's array-indexing also starting at 1.

```suggestion
| 1 | `update_bit` | `0x01` | `1` → point is updated in SOR; `0` → fixed point (contacts, exterior boundaries) |
| 2 | `undepleted_bit` | `0x02` | `1` → point is undepleted; `0` → fully depleted |
| 3 | `pn_junction_bit` | `0x04` | `1` → point lies inside the semiconductor volume |
| 4 | `bulk_bit` | `0x08` | `1` → all points in the 3×3×3 neighbourhood (face-, edge-, and corner-adjacent) also have `pn_junction_bit` and `update_bit` set |
| 5 | `inactive_layer_bit` | `0x10` | `1` → point is part of the inactive (dead) layer |
| 6 | `inactive_contact_bit` | `0x20` | `1` → point is part of the contact adjacent to the inactive layer |
```

They can be queried with bitwise AND:

```julia
using SolidStateDetectors: update_bit, undepleted_bit, pn_junction_bit,

>                             bulk_bit, inactive_layer_bit, inactive_contact_bit

Reviewer: `inactive_contact_bit` is not used in this code example.

Reviewer: Still not used in the example (?)

pt = sim.point_types.data[i, j, k]   # PointType (UInt8) at one grid point
is_fixed       = pt & update_bit         == 0
is_undepleted  = pt & undepleted_bit     > 0
in_pn_junction = pt & pn_junction_bit    > 0
in_bulk        = pt & bulk_bit           > 0
in_inactive    = pt & inactive_layer_bit > 0

> ```

Reviewer: We also have convenience functions for this, not sure if we should also mention them here:
https://github.com/JuliaPhysics/SolidStateDetectors.jl/blob/71bf61d05135e472fea7643abaa7a1cebcc187a8/src/ScalarPotentials/PointTypes.jl#L36-L39

Reviewer: Do we want convenience functions for `bulk_bit` and `inactive_contact_bit` as well?

Author: I think we shouldn't since they don't have a concrete call site that needs them. The bitwise check is already shown in the docs in case it's needed

The most frequently encountered values are:

| Physical description | Dec | Hex | Active bits |
|----------------------|-----|-----|-------------|
| Contact (fixed) | 0 | `0x00` | None |
| Exterior / vacuum (updateable) | 1 | `0x01` | `update` |
| Semiconductor boundary, depleted | 5 | `0x05` | `pn_junction` + `update` |
| Semiconductor boundary, undepleted | 7 | `0x07` | `pn_junction` + `undepleted` + `update` |
| Active bulk, depleted | 13 | `0x0d` | `bulk` + `pn_junction` + `update` |
| Active bulk, undepleted | 15 | `0x0f` | `bulk` + `pn_junction` + `undepleted` + `update` |
| Inactive layer (boundary) | 23 | `0x17` | `inactive_layer` + `pn_junction` + `undepleted` + `update` |
| Inactive layer | 31 | `0x1f` | `inactive_layer` + `bulk` + `pn_junction` + `undepleted` + `update` |
| Contact adjacent to inactive layer | 32 | `0x20` | `inactive_contact` |

## Information from Point Types

### Depletion and Active Volume

`is_depleted(sim.point_types)` returns `true` when no **bulk** point remains undepleted outside the inactive layer.
Concretely, it checks whether any point simultaneously satisfies all three conditions:

```

> bulk_bit = 1   AND   undepleted_bit = 1   AND   inactive_layer_bit = 0

Reviewer: Consistent spacing:
```suggestion
bulk_bit = 1    AND   undepleted_bit = 1   AND   inactive_layer_bit = 0
```

```

If no such point exists, the detector is considered fully depleted.
Points inside the inactive layer (`inactive_layer_bit = 1`) are **excluded** from this check.

The active volume (`get_active_volume(sim.point_types)`) sums the cell volumes of all grid cells satisfying:

```
pn_junction_bit = 1   AND   undepleted_bit = 0   AND   update_bit = 1
```

Because inactive layer cells always carry `undepleted_bit = 1`, they are automatically excluded from the active volume.

### Depletion Voltage Estimation

`estimate_depletion_voltage` applies the same inactive layer exclusion: only points with `pn_junction_bit = 1 AND inactive_layer_bit = 0` (and `bulk_bit = 1` in the final refinement step) are considered.
The returned voltage is therefore the bias at which the **active bulk** outside the inactive layer first becomes fully depleted.

### Inactive Layer Automatic Detection

> The inactive layer is the permanently undepleted region that forms near the lithium-doped contact of a p-type HPGe detector.

Reviewer: This could be more generic (assuming that people would also use this for highly-doped contacts in silicon detectors for example.

```suggestion
The inactive layer is the permanently undepleted region that forms near highly-doped contact of a semiconductor detector.
```
?

### Full Depletion Depth via `get_FDD`

`get_FDD(sim)` computes the Full Depletion Depth (FDD) — the thickness of the inactive layer — at every point on the inner boundary of the inactive layer.

Two contours are extracted from the point types grid:

- **Inner contour** (`r_inner`, `z_inner`): the inactive-layer / active-bulk transition.
  A grid point belongs to the inner contour when it carries `inactive_layer_bit = 1` **and** has at least one face-adjacent neighbour with `inactive_layer_bit = 0` and `pn_junction_bit = 1` (i.e. a neighbour that is inside the semiconductor but outside the inactive layer).

- **Outer contour** (`r_outer`, `z_outer`): the inner face of the doped contact, where the inactive layer meets the detector boundary.
  Every grid tick inside the doped contact geometry carries `inactive_contact_bit = 1`.
  For each inner contour point the nearest such contact tick (by Euclidean distance in the r-z plane) is selected as `r_outer`/`z_outer`.

In both calculation paths the FDD measures the distance from the inner contour to the inner face of the contact; the contact's own physical thickness is never included:

> - **When the model stores a `distance_to_contact` function** (e.g. `ThermalDiffusionLithiumDensity` or `PtypePNJunctionImpurityDensity`): `thickness` is computed as `ConstructiveSolidGeometry.distance_to_surface` from the inner contour point to the contact geometry. For a point outside the contact this always returns the distance to the nearest (inner) surface of the contact, giving an exact analytical perpendicular distance regardless of surface orientation and regardless of how thick the contact is.

Reviewer: Is this correct?
I would naively assume that if `distance_to_contact` exists, this would be the function to use INSTEAD of `ConstructiveSolidGeometry.distance_to_surface` (?)

```suggestion
- **When the model stores a `distance_to_contact` function** (e.g. `ThermalDiffusionLithiumDensity` or `PtypePNJunctionImpurityDensity`): `thickness` is computed by evaluating `distance_to_contact` at the inner contour point. For a point outside the contact this always returns the distance to the nearest (inner) surface of the contact, giving an exact analytical perpendicular distance regardless of surface orientation and regardless of how thick the contact is.
```

Author: You are right, this is a bit complicated way of explaining it since the code calls dist_fn(...) which calls distance_to_contact directly

- **Fallback**: Euclidean distance from the inner contour point to the nearest contact grid tick (r-z plane for cylindrical, 3D for Cartesian). Because the inner contour sits just outside the contact, the nearest tick is on the innermost layer of the contact for standard detector geometries, so the contact thickness is not counted here either.

For **axis-aligned surfaces** (vertical bore wall, horizontal top/bottom face, vertical outer wall) the nearest contact tick lies exactly along the surface normal, so the Euclidean distance from `(r_inner, z_inner)` to `(r_outer, z_outer)` equals `thickness` exactly.

> For **diagonal surfaces** (e.g. a cone face) the nearest contact tick on the slanted surface is not the perpendicular foot, so the Euclidean distance can differ from `thickness` of the FDD (either direction, depending on grid snapping); use the `thickness` field for the correct value.

Reviewer: What is the `thickness` field? This is only explained later

Each entry in the result is a `NamedTuple` with fields:

| Field | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `r_inner` / `z_inner` | Coordinates of the inner boundary point (inactive layer / active bulk transition), [m]|
| `r_outer` / `z_outer` | Coordinates of the nearest grid point on the doped contact surface (carries `inactive_contact_bit`), [m]|
| `thickness` | Perpendicular distance from the inner boundary to the contact surface = FDD thickness, [m]|

For Cartesian detectors the fields are `x_inner`, `y_inner`, `z_inner`, `x_outer`, `y_outer`, `z_outer`, `thickness`.

````@setup fdd
using Plots
using SolidStateDetectors
using Unitful
gr(fmt = :png) #hide

T = Float64
sim = Simulation{T}(SSD_examples[:IVCIlayer])
sim.world = typeof(sim.world)(sim.world.intervals, ntuple(_ -> T(5e-5), 3))

> calculate_electric_potential!(sim, depletion_handling = true, use_nthreads = 4)

Reviewer: This takes quite some time to run, because the grid is very fine.

Author: I increased the size, it's just to show how the surface refinement tool is used, I don't think we added an example of this

all_fdd = get_FDD(sim)                             # full contour, all coordinates
fdd_at_r = get_FDD(sim; r = 5u"mm")                # only inner-contour points nearest r = 5 mm
````

````@example fdd

> let

Reviewer: I would remove enclosing this in `let`. Or is there a specific reason why that is included?

Author: No specific reason, there's only one block in the end so I deleted it

The contact carrying `inactive_contact_bit` is identified through the semiconductor impurity density model (`PtypePNJunctionImpurityDensity`).

> ### Full Depletion Depth via `get_full_depletion_depth`

Reviewer: I would remove the function name from the title:
```suggestion
### Full Depletion Depth
```

T = Float64
sim = Simulation{T}(SSD_examples[:IVCIlayer])
sim.world = typeof(sim.world)(sim.world.intervals, ntuple(_ -> T(9e-5), 3))  # surface refinement spacing
calculate_electric_potential!(sim, depletion_handling = true, use_nthreads = 4)
all_fdd = get_fdd(sim)                             # full contour, all coordinates
fdd_at_r = get_fdd(sim; r = 5u"mm")                # only inner-contour points nearest r = 5 mm
````

````@example fdd
t_mm = [pt.thickness * 1000 for pt in all_fdd]

p1 = plot(sim.point_types, all_point_types = true,
          title = "FDD inner contour (red)", legend = false, colorbar = true)
scatter!(p1,
    [pt.r_inner for pt in all_fdd], [pt.z_inner for pt in all_fdd],
    markershape = :circle, markersize = 1,
    color = :red, markerstrokewidth = 0)

p2 = scatter(
    [pt.r_inner * 1000 for pt in all_fdd],
    [pt.z_inner * 1000 for pt in all_fdd],
    marker_z = t_mm,
    color = :heat, colorbar = true, colorbar_title = "thickness [mm]",

>     clims = (minimum(t_mm), maximum(t_mm)),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    clims = extrema(t_mm),
